Contexts are composed of configurations of patterns, patterns are composed of configurations of variables, and variables are composed of configurations of first principle dimensional properties, such as quantifiers and qualitative adjective descriptive comparisons, and those relational frameworks can simulate the meat of metaphor, as two analogies juxtaposed by similar relational operators that form a cross-domain relation in an overlap of meaning or intention or something else.
Analogies mimic patterns across contexts via Cross-Domain Relations.
Cross-Domain Relations go from domain to domain when the range is the same, as an overlap.
That is the basis of Analogical Reasoning.
If data has recognizable features, it is a pattern.
Repetition is what makes a symmetry, and is what makes a pattern's features recognizable.
Information is a symphony of symbolism and symmetry.
Every pattern in every context is unique to the properties and axioms of the contexts that they exist in.
All truth is but an approximation of a deeper truth.
Knowledge is information that contains meaning.
Language is permutations of semantics, governed by syntax and context, with meaningful intention.
Yet people tend to not see patterns that they are not shown.
We are surrounded by answers, but they are all meaningless and are often impossible to detect without knowing at least some of the questions that their existence is derived from.
Without a question / answer connection, there is no consciousness, and awareness would not exist.
A symmetry is an example of an internal algebra.
Unique symmetries have a prime number of repetitions or symmetry partition sections.
Prime numbers are the balance points in the Universe.
Unique symmetries are atomic repetitions, and are the simplest form of patterns, distinct from perceptually apparent random chaos.
I do not believe in ultimate randomness; I do believe that there are many reasons for everything.
Analogical mimicry results in similar, yet distinctly different patterns.
Understanding is subject to the computational complexity of the perceiver, the forms of data, and the content perceived.
Knowledge is the quest of discovery, and understanding is the growth of the perceiver.
It is how possibilities happen through careful navigation.
There are no dead ends.
One method is to mark fundamental landmark differences in the analogical mimicry of patterns, to form possible classification category augmentations for navigation and data retrieval purposes.
Beware of oversimplification of data streams in order to fit a pattern into a perceptual mold (as Andrew Dougherty has advised).
Even if my ideas seem to overlap with existing knowledge (which may be another though coincidental example of Cross-Domain Relations), they provide a new way of understanding that knowledge, due to their existence in different contextual settings.
These ideas and patterns, as with others, can eventually be linked to ideas in other contexts.
Lexicons can often be linked to external contexts in frameworks (as Marvin Minsky has described).
Metaphorically speaking, prime numbers are one to one, and composite numbers are one to many, when translating functions from one context to another.
Similarly, single-repetition patterns are one to one and composite patterns are one to many, when translating relations from one context to another.
That is an essential part of analogical reasoning applied to patterns and numbers.
Patterns in Contexts, a theory of knowledge representation.
Information, by its very nature, is a division.
Yet it strives to become whole again, and at the very least, to become balanced.
